Delimited continuation primops
==============================

.. author:: Alexis King
.. date-accepted:: 2021-01-18
.. ticket-url:: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/7942
.. implemented:: 9.6.1
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal was `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/313>`_.
.. contents::

In recent years, the Haskell community has demonstrated serious interest
in algebraic effect systems. Though several implementations already
exist, performance remains a significant obstacle to broader adoption.
Stephen Diehl put it well in `a recent blog
post <http://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/decade.html>`__:

   In the usual Haskell tradition, there are several models exploring
   different points in the design space. In their current state, these
   projects introduce quite a bit of overhead, and some of them even
   require a plethora of GHC plugins to optimise away certain
   abstractions or to fix type inference problems.

A limiting factor for effect system performance is the need to implement
delimited continuations outside of the runtime. Accordingly, this
proposal presents a design for native delimited continuation primops
that can be used to efficiently capture the RTS stack.

A guiding principle of the design is to be *minimal*. Rather than burden
GHC with the full complexity of designing and implementing algebraic
effects, this proposal provides a path for users to experiment with
designs as ordinary Haskell libraries without sacrificing performance.

Motivation
----------

As described above, the primary use case for this proposal is effect
libraries. Discussing the full complexity of effect systems is outside
the scope of this proposal, but the relevant detail is that effect
systems provide the ability to capture portions of the current
continuation. Without native support for first-class continuations from
the runtime, this must be implemented by CPSing the program. In Haskell,
this is naturally expressed using a monad. Various monadic
implementations of delimited control already exist:

-  `“A Monadic Framework for Delimited Continuations” by Kent Dybvig,
   Simon Peyton Jones, and Amr
   Sabry <https://legacy.cs.indiana.edu/~dyb/pubs/monadicDC.pdf>`__ is
   the canonical resource, `further refined by Oleg
   Kiselyov <http://okmij.org/ftp/continuations/implementations.html#CC-monads>`__
   and implemented as the
   `CC-delcont <https://hackage.haskell.org/package/CC-delcont>`__
   library.

-  Also presented by Kiselyov, `the so-called “freer
   monad” <http://okmij.org/ftp/Computation/free-monad.html#freer>`__
   has been used in several libraries to implement delimited
   continuations specifically for the purpose of effect systems.

-  The `effects <https://hackage.haskell.org/package/effects>`__ library
   uses nested continuation transformers to achieve delimited control.

These approaches have various performance tradeoffs, but all of them
suffer from a fatal flaw: programs must pay for the cost of continuation
capture, **even if they never actually capture the continuation!** This
is a real problem for effect systems, as many programs that use effects
have no need to capture the continuation. The ``Reader``, ``State``, and
``Writer`` effects need no continuation manipulation, and the ``Error``
effect only needs to abort the continuation early, not capture it.

To make this cost more concrete, consider the following example monadic
code:

.. code:: haskell

   f a b = g a >>= \c -> h $! (b + c)

Depending on the particular monad used, this code may be compiled in
dramatically different ways. Suppose for a moment that the monad in
question is ``IO``. Even if ``g`` and ``h`` are not inlined, GHC will
compile ``f`` efficiently, producing STG code along these lines:

.. code:: haskell

   f = \r [a b void]
     case g a void# of { Unit# c ->
     case b of { I# x ->
     case c of { I# y ->
     case +# [x y] of z { __DEFAULT ->
     let { d = I#! [z] } in
     h d void# }}}}

Notice that there is only one use of ``let`` in this program, which is
good, since at the STG level, ``let`` means “heap allocation.” This STG
has a straightforward translation to native code: the call to ``g`` can
be made in the usual way by pushing a return address onto the stack and
jumping to ``g``, and ``g``\ ’s result will be on the top of the stack
when it returns.

Now suppose the monad in question isn’t ``IO``, but ``Cont``, the
continuation monad. Looking at the STG output reveals something
dramatically worse:

.. code:: haskell

   f = \r [a b]
     let { m = \u [] g a } in
     let { k1 = \r [k3]
       let { k2 = \r [c]
         case b of { I# x ->
         case c of { I# y ->
         case +# [x y] of z { __DEFAULT ->
         let { d = I#! [z] } in
         h d k3 }}}
       } in m k2
     } in k1

Unlike the ``IO`` code, this has not one but *four* uses of ``let``! CPS
is the culprit: the calls to ``g`` and ``h`` are each passed a
continuation, which must be a closure, and closures are allocated on the
heap. This means that all computations in ``Cont`` end up traversing a
long chain of heap-allocated closures, whether they ever actually
capture the continuation or not.

Note that this example is the best case scenario if ``g`` and ``h`` are
not inlined. The STG above still assumes ``>>=`` is specialized and
inlined and that its unfolding is simple. In practice, effect systems
usually add even more overhead:

-  Real systems have to implement tagged delimited continuations, which
   requires extra bookkeeping.

-  Some effect systems use ``mtl``-style constraints to be polymorphic
   in the monad instead of using a concrete type, but this makes things
   even worse. Each call to ``>>=`` becomes an unknown call, and GHC
   can’t even avoid allocating a closure in an expression like
   ``pure x >>= f y``.

-  The CPS transformation obscures the structure of the code from the
   simplifier and demand analyzer and makes user-defined ``RULES`` far
   trickier to write.

Without support from the runtime, this overhead is inevitable. This is
especially frustrating because GHC’s implementation presents no real
obstacles to implementing continuation capture directly. What’s more,
the needed primitive functionality is small: given only the ability to
capture and restore a slice of the RTS stack, more complicated patterns
can be efficiently implemented as derived operations in library code.

Putting numbers to the cost
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To help motivate this proposal, I have implemented the proposed primops
and used them to build `a fully-featured effect library,
``eff``. <https://github.com/hasura/eff>`__ Pitted against other effect
systems in use today, ``eff`` is the decisive victor on the CountDown
microbenchmark used to evaluate the performance of effect dispatch:

.. figure:: 0313-countdown-benchmark.png
   :alt: graph of CountDown benchmark results

   graph of CountDown benchmark results

This benchmark is extremely synthetic—it just uses a ``State`` effect to
decrement a counter until it reaches zero—so its results should be taken
with a grain of salt. The “reference” implementation is just a recursive
function that uses no effect system at all, and it does unrealistically
well because the program is so simple GHC just turns it into a tight
loop on unboxed integers. Still, it’s simple way to illustrate the
unnecessary overhead of existing implementations.

It’s worth reiterating that this benchmark is **not** evaluating the
performance of continuation capture and restore—this benchmark never
captures any continuations at all. Rather, it benchmarks the cost that
libraries have to pay to support continuations even when they aren’t
used. ``eff`` does better because it is able to avoid paying that cost
unless it actually becomes necessary.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

The scope of the proposed change is limited to the RTS: no other part of
the compiler needs to be touched. The user-facing interface consists of
one new primitive type and three new primops:

.. code:: haskell

   type PromptTag# (a :: Type)

   newPromptTag# :: forall (a :: Type). State# RealWorld -> (State# RealWorld, PromptTag a)

   prompt#
     :: forall (a :: Type)
      . PromptTag# a
     -> (State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, a #))
     -> State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, a #)

   control0#
     :: forall (a :: Type) (r :: RuntimeRep) (b :: TYPE r)
      . PromptTag# a
     -> (((State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, b #))
          -> State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, a #))
         -> State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, a #))
     -> State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, b #)

The type of ``control0#`` is rather intimidating, so it is more useful
to consider the types in terms of ``IO`` rather than functions on
``State#`` tokens:

.. code:: haskell

   data PromptTag a = PromptTag (PromptTag# a)
   newPromptTag :: IO (PromptTag a)
   prompt :: PromptTag a -> IO a -> IO a
   control0 :: PromptTag a -> ((IO b -> IO a) -> IO a) -> IO b

However, note that I do **not** propose actually providing the ``IO``
versions anywhere! There is **no** safe way to use these operations in
arbitrary ``IO`` code, for reasons given below. The intended use of
``prompt#`` and ``control0#`` is in library code that can arrange for
them to be used safely; an example is given in the Examples section.

Operational semantics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The names and semantics of ``prompt`` and ``control0`` come from `the
paper “Shift to control” by Chung-chieh
Shan <http://homes.sice.indiana.edu/ccshan/recur/recur.pdf>`__. As their
names imply, they are closely related to both Felleisen’s original
``prompt`` and ``control`` operators, which in turn are closely related
to Danvy and Filinski’s ``reset`` and ``shift``. The differences lie in
whether the prompt is included in the captured continuation and whether
it is removed upon aborting; the reduction rules show the differences
clearly:

-  | prompt *v* ⟶ *v*
   | prompt *E*\ [control *x*\ 1 *e*] ⟶ prompt ((λ *x*\ 1. *e*) (λ
     *x*\ 2. *E*\ [*x*\ 2]))

-  | reset *v* ⟶ *v*
   | reset *E*\ [shift *x*\ 1 *e*] ⟶ reset ((λ *x*\ 1. *e*) (λ *x*\ 2.
     reset *E*\ [*x*\ 2]))

-  | prompt *v* ⟶ *v*
   | prompt *E*\ [control0 *x*\ 1 *e*] ⟶ ((λ *x*\ 1. *e*) (λ *x*\ 2.
     *E*\ [*x*\ 2]))

``control0`` is unique in that it neither leaves the prompt behind *nor*
includes it in the captured continuation. Under the classification given
by Dybvig et al. in section 2.2 of `the Monadic Framework
paper <https://legacy.cs.indiana.edu/~dyb/pubs/monadicDC.pdf>`__,
``control0`` implements the −ℱ − semantics. They explain why this
semantics is desirable:

   We have chosen −ℱ − semantics for our building-block operator
   ``withSubCont`` because the −ℱ − semantics easily models each of the
   others with the trivial addition of ``pushPrompt`` forms where
   necessary to leave behind or reinstate a prompt.

In other words, ``control0`` is the most general of the standard
continuation operators, so it’s the obvious choice to implement as a
primitive.

Prompt tags
^^^^^^^^^^^

Also like the Monadic Framework paper, RTS continuation prompts are
explicitly *tagged*. A ``PromptTag#`` serves two purposes:

1. It provides a label that can be used to identify the prompt to
   capture up to, even if there are intervening uses of ``prompt#`` with
   different tags.

2. It connects the type expected by the ``prompt#`` call to the
   corresponding ``control0#`` call, preserving type safety.

Prompt tags are created using the ``newPromptTag#`` primop, which
produces a new prompt tag that is distinct from all other tags. Prompt
tags can be compared for equality, but they are otherwise entirely
opaque.

Precise semantics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the addition of tags, ``control0`` includes a minor
departure from its conventional semantics: the captured continuation
accepts a *computation* as an argument rather than a *value*. That is,
``prompt#`` and ``control0#`` are properly defined by the following
reduction rules:

-  prompt# *tag* (:raw-latex:`\s`2 -> (# s2, *e* #)) *s1*\  ⟶ (# *s1*,
   *e* #)

-  | prompt# *tag* *E*\ [control0# *tag* *e*] *s1*\  ⟶ \ *e*
     (:raw-latex:`\m `s2 -> *E*\ [m s2]) *s1*\ 
   | where *``E``* contains no intervening prompt# *tag*\ 

This mimics the semantics of the ``pushPrompt`` operator of Dybvig et
al., and it allows a continuation to be restored before proceeding with
further computation. In Haskell, this is useful for reinstalling
exception handlers or interrupt masking state. For example, using the
``IO``-wrapped operators,

.. code:: haskell

   prompt tag $ catch (control0 tag $ \k -> k $ throwIO (ErrorCall "bang"))
                      (\(ErrorCall msg) -> pure msg)

is equivalent to ``pure "bang"``, since the application of ``k`` will
reinstall the exception handler before executing the ``throwIO`` call.
In contrast,

.. code:: haskell

   prompt tag $ catch (control0 tag $ \k -> k . pure =<< throwIO (ErrorCall "bang"))
                      (\(ErrorCall msg) -> pure msg)

raises an exception, since ``k`` is not restored until after the call to
``throwIO`` returns.

Restrictions and error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Uses of ``control0#`` must obey the following restrictions:

-  There must be a matching call to ``prompt#`` with the same tag
   somewhere in the current evaluation context.

-  The corresponding ``prompt#`` call must be a part of the current
   (strict) ``State#`` thread. In other words, it is illegal to capture
   a continuation that includes ``unsafePerformIO`` or
   ``unsafeInterleaveIO`` as a continuation frame.

-  Similarly, STM transactions are not re-entrant, so it is illegal to
   capture a continuation that includes ``atomically#``,
   ``catchRetry#``, or ``catchSTM#`` as a continuation frame.

If any of these restrictions are violated, and exception is raised at
the point of the call to ``control0#``. Together, these restrictions
ensure a consistent, unambiguous meaning of “the current evaluation
context,” even though Haskell is call-by-need.

Runtime implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Concretely, ``prompt#`` and ``control0#`` are implemented in the RTS via
direct manipulation of the current thread’s stack. ``prompt#`` pushes a
``RET_SMALL`` frame with a well-known info table, and ``control0#``
copies the stack above the ``prompt#`` frame into the heap. The stack
pointer is adjusted to point just below the ``prompt#`` frame, and
execution resumes by applying the function provided to ``control0#`` to
the captured continuation.

Dually, applying a continuation pushes the captured frames onto the
stack, then applies the provided function. Because the continuation
accepts a function rather than a value, there is no obstacle to making
that “side” of the continuation levity-polymorphic. (The inverse is not
true; making ``prompt#`` levity-polymorphic would be more involved, so
this proposal requires a lifted type.)

``CONTINUATION`` is a new closure type. It is similar to the existing
``AP_STACK``, but while an ``AP_STACK`` is a thunk with a chunk of stack
attached to it, a ``CONTINUATION`` is a *function* represented by a
chunk of stack. For the most part, a ``CONTINUATION`` behaves exactly
like a ``FUN`` of arity 2 that accepts a pointer and a ``RealWorld``
token, but its representation requires some cooperation from the runtime
to allow the garbage collector to traverse the captured stack frames.

Examples
--------

The motivation section already mentions a significant worked example,
`the ``eff`` effect library. <https://github.com/hasura/eff>`__ That
motivates the proposal’s usefulness, but it is rather complicated, so I
present a much simpler example below as a simple illustration of the
primops’ behavior.

To start, we can replicate the interface of the Monadic Framework paper
using ``prompt#`` and ``control0#`` rather than CPS:

.. code:: haskell

   type role CC nominal representational
   newtype CC ans a = CC (State# RealWorld -> (# State# RealWorld, a #))
     deriving (Functor, Applicative, Monad) via IO

   runCC :: (forall ans. CC ans a) -> a
   runCC (CC m) = case runRW# m of (# _, a #) -> a

   type role Prompt nominal representational
   data Prompt ans a = Prompt (PromptTag# a)

   newPrompt :: CC ans (Prompt ans a)
   newPrompt = CC $ \s1 -> case newPromptTag# s1 of
     (# s2, tag #) -> (# s2, Prompt tag #)

   pushPrompt :: Prompt ans a -> CC ans a -> CC ans a
   pushPrompt (Prompt tag) (CC m) = CC $ prompt# tag m

   type SubCont ans a b = CC ans a -> CC ans b

   withSubCont :: Prompt ans b -> (SubCont ans a b -> CC ans b) -> CC ans a
   withSubCont (Prompt tag) f = CC $ control0# tag $ \k ->
     case f (\(CC m) -> CC (k m)) of CC m -> m

   pushSubCont :: SubCont ans a b -> CC ans a -> CC ans b
   pushSubCont = id

We can now directly run all of the examples in the paper.

(TODO: Show some examples and their STG output side-by-side with the STG
output from ``CC-delcont``.)

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

The changes required to implement ``prompt#`` and ``control0#`` are
relatively minimal. They only impact the RTS, and they do not require
any changes to existing functionality. Though capturing portions of the
RTS stack may seem like a radical proposition, GHC actually already does
it when raising an asynchronous exception to avoid the need to duplicate
work for any blackholed thunks. In fact, getting that right is
significantly more subtle than implementing ``control0#``, which is
quite straightforward in comparison.

A more important consideration is how ``control0#`` might interact with
user programs. As alluded to above, ``control0#`` is fundamentally
dangerous when used with arbitrary ``IO`` code, as existing programs do
not account for the possibility of re-entrant ``IO`` computations. For
example, consider code such as the following:

.. code:: haskell

   m = withFile path ReadMode $ \h -> hGetLine h >> control0 tag f >> hGetContents h

Internally, ``withFile`` uses ``bracket`` to manage the lifetime of a
``Handle``, but it isn’t clear what the behavior ought to be if a
captured continuation includes a ``withFile`` frame. Several
possibilities come to mind:

-  The most lax approach is to do nothing when the continuation is
   captured and restored, but this may cause resource leaks or
   nonsensical behavior if a continuation is captured but never restored
   or restored multiple times.

-  Continuation capture unwinds the stack, so arguably the ``Handle``
   should be closed upon the call to ``control0``. This is reasonable,
   but it precludes legitimate use cases where a continuation may be
   captured and re-applied shortly thereafter.

-  A more satisfying approach would be to make ``bracket`` behave like
   Scheme’s ``dynamic-wind``, where the “allocate” and “destroy” actions
   are executed upon every jump in or out of the delimited context. This
   might work better for some resources, like a mutex, but it doesn’t
   work for ``withFile``, since any state of the ``Handle`` will be
   destroyed. (And even if it could somehow be recreated, the captured
   continuation already closes over the *old* ``Handle``.)

Existing code just isn’t equipped to deal with continuations.
Furthermore, adequately handling these situations in general is not a
solved problem. Therefore, this proposal punts the problem to library
authors, who may experiment with different solutions outside of GHC
proper.

Async exceptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Special care must be taken when capturing and restoring continuations
that include ``maskAsyncExceptions#``, ``maskUninterruptible#``, or
``unmaskAsyncExceptions#`` frames. For example, the program

.. code:: haskell

   prompt tag $ mask_ (control0 tag f >>= g)

must unmask async exceptions during continuation capture and re-mask
them upon continuation restore. This ensures async exceptions remain
masked during the evaluation of ``g``, even if the continuation is
restored in a context where they are not masked.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

The cost of implementing this change is small. As mentioned in the
previous section, most of the assumptions needed to implement
continuations are already necessary to support async exceptions. The
added maintenance burden to support continuations is minimal.

Alternatives
------------

The design space for higher-order control operators is enormous. While
many approaches are equivalently expressive, different choices of
primitives can influence implementation decisions and performance
characteristics. Any implementation must answer all of the following
questions:

1. **Should capturing a continuation include an implicit abort?**

   There is no fundamental need to unwind the stack during continuation
   capture. If a continuation is captured only to be immediately
   restored, it would be better to just avoid aborting in the first
   place.

   This proposal chooses to include an implicit abort in ``control0#``
   because it is more useful in the context of effect systems, and
   aborting to the prompt as a separate operation would require
   needlessly traversing the stack twice. This decision doesn’t lose any
   expressiveness, just some potential performance. A variant of
   ``control0#`` that leaves the stack intact could always be added
   later if it proves useful.

2. **Should applying a continuation include an implicit abort?**

   Traditional ``call/cc`` continuations *replace* the current
   continuation when applied rather than simply extend it. If such
   replacements are common, an implementation can optimize for them.

   This proposal chooses to implement non-abortive (aka “functional”)
   continuations because they seem to be significantly more useful in
   practice, and it’s always possible to abort before applying a
   continuation.

3. **Should copying happen at continuation capture or continuation
   application?**

   Fundamentally, multi-shot continuations require *some* copying, but
   some implementations defer the copying to continuation application
   rather than continuation capture. Chez Scheme, for example,
   implements ``call/cc`` by repurposing the current call stack as the
   continuation and creating a new stack chunk that underflows to an
   application of the continuation.

   Deferring copying to continuation application sounds attractive, but
   the implementation strategy used by Chez only makes sense for
   undelimited ``call/cc``. Adapting the approach to ``control0#`` would
   require eagerly allocating a new stack chunk for each use of
   ``prompt#``, a significant cost.

The proposed implementation strategy is designed to be simple and
conservative. Certain approaches can be more efficient for particular
usage patterns, but in the absence of real-world benchmarks to guide
such optimization, adding complexity for the sake of small performance
gains seems premature. The simple interface of ``prompt#`` and
``control0#`` allows the representation of continuations to be optimized
in the future if it proves useful.

Unresolved Questions
--------------------

There are no unresolved questions at this time.

Implementation Plan
-------------------

The proposed change is already mostly implemented. The implementation is
available on the ```first-class-continuations``
branch <https://gitlab.haskell.org/lexi.lambda/ghc/compare/master...first-class-continuations>`__
of my fork of GHC.
