Unsatisfiable
=============

.. author:: Adam Gundry
.. date-accepted:: 2021-12-08
.. ticket-url:: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20835
.. implemented:: 9.8.1
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal was `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/433>`_.
.. sectnum::
.. contents::

This proposal introduces a new built-in constraint form, ``Unsatisfiable``, as a
mechanism for introducing custom type error messages. It is similar to the
existing ``TypeError`` built-in type family, but it is more predictable when
errors are reported.

A previous iteration of this proposal included another constraint form,
``Warning``, for custom type warnings.  This is now described in `proposal #454
<https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/454>`_ instead.


Motivation
----------

GHC allows users to define custom type error messages using the ``TypeError``
type family.  This is defined (in ``GHC.TypeLits``) as follows::

  type family TypeError (a :: ErrorMessage) :: b where

``TypeError`` is poly-kinded, so it can be instantiated wherever needed:
typically either on the right-hand side of a type family definition to mark an
invalid case, or in a context (instantiating it at kind ``Constraint``) to
indicate that a constraint should not be solved.

When GHC is reporting custom type errors it renders the user-supplied
``ErrorMessage`` argument in place of the usual type error message. The details
of the ``ErrorMessage`` type are not crucial here: it allows concatenation of
literal strings and pretty-printed types.  For further details of the current
design, see the `GHC user's guide on TypeError
<https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/9.0.1/docs/html/users_guide/exts/type_errors.html>`_.

However, type families do not currently enjoy a clearly-defined operational
semantics. It is not well specified under what circumstances GHC will reduce
type families during the constraint solving stage of type inference, so it is
not obvious when a ``TypeError`` will be encountered and reported as an error.
In practice, GHC solves constraints normally, then when reporting unsolved
constraints, it searches the constraint type for occurrences of ``TypeError``
and reports any that it finds.  Unfortunately, this can lead to surprising
behaviour, as the following subsections describe.



``TypeError`` can report errors too lazily
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following is a tempting but problematic use of ``TypeError``, because it
does not report an error when one would be expected::

  type family NotCharBad x :: Type where
    NotCharBad Char = TypeError (Text "Oops")
    NotCharBad x    = x

  f :: x -> [NotCharBad x] -> [NotCharBad x]
  f _ r = r

  oops :: Bool
  oops = null (f 'x' [])

The intention is that ``f`` should not be callable with ``x ~ Char``.  However
type-checking ``oops`` does not depend on how ``NotCharBad Char`` reduces, so
the ``TypeError`` is not triggered.

See `#13775 <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/13775>`_ for another
example of a type error being reported too lazily.

Where it is important that certain inputs are prohibited, a better pattern is to
use type families that return constraints::

  type family NotCharGood x :: Constraint where
    NotCharGood Char = TypeError (Text "Oops")
    NotCharGood x    = ()

  g :: NotCharGood x => x -> [x] -> [x]
  g _ r = r

Now type-checking ``null (g 'x' [])`` will need to solve the ``NotCharGood
Char`` constraint, and hence will trigger the ``TypeError``.


``TypeError`` can report errors too eagerly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the previous subsection, we saw a program that did not report a custom type
error when one would be expected, and that this can be avoided by using
``TypeError`` at kind ``Constraint``.  However, the opposite problem exists as
well: sometimes custom type errors are reported when they are not expected.

As a simple example, it is not possible to directly write a function which will
trigger a type error when used, because this is rejected at the definition site
(in released GHC versions, though this is changing per `#20241
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20241>`_)::

  foo :: TypeError (Text "Don't call foo") => Int
  foo = 0

As a more substantial example, consider the following (where ``If`` is the type
family from ``Data.Type.Bool``)::

  -- Using a type family rather than a type synonym to work around #20181
  type family ExpectTrue x :: Constraint where
    ExpectTrue x = If x (() :: Constraint) (TypeError (Text "Input was False!"))

  h :: ExpectTrue x => proxy x -> ()
  h _ = ()

  -- This works:
  eg1 _ = h (Proxy @True)

  -- This yields an error (expected):
  eg2 _ = h (Proxy @False)

  -- This yields an error (unexpected):
  eg3 p = h p

Here ``h`` is supposed to be called with ``x ~ True``.  As one would expect,
explicitly instantiating ``x ~ True`` allows it to be called, while
instantiating ``x ~ False`` triggers the error.  However, ``eg3`` demonstrates
that the error is triggered also when ``x`` is unconstrained.  This is because
GHC infers that::

  eg3 :: If x () (TypeError (Text "Input was False!")) => proxy x -> ()

Even though ``x`` is not yet known, and the ``If`` type family application may
reduce to eliminate the ``TypeError`` depending on the value of ``x``, GHC still
reports the occurrence of the ``TypeError``.

See `#14771 <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/14771>`_ and `#16906
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/16906>`_ for more examples of
errors being reported too eagerly.




``TypeError`` can report too many errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the uses of ``TypeError`` is to point out that a class instance is
impossible, with a domain-specific error message. For example::

  class ReflexiveEq a where
      reflexiveEq :: a -> a -> Bool

  instance TypeError (Text "Equality is not reflexive on Double") => ReflexiveEq Double where
      reflexiveEq _ _ = False

This displays the custom type error when trying to use the instance::

  ghci> reflexiveEq 0 (0 :: Double)

  <interactive>:28:1: error:
      • Equality is not reflexive on Double
      • In the expression: reflexiveEq 0 (0 :: Double)

However, when superclasses are involved, the instance may need to carry
additional constraints, which can result in too many errors being reported.  For
example::

  class Eq a => ReflexiveEq' a where
      reflexiveEq' :: a -> a -> Bool
      reflexiveEq' = (==)

  instance (TypeError (Text "Can't compare functions with reflexiveEq"), Eq (a -> b)) => ReflexiveEq' (a -> b)

  instance TypeError (Text "Can't compare functions with (==)") => Eq (a -> b) where
      _ == _ = False

Notice that the instance for ``ReflexiveEq'`` had to repeat the ``Eq (a -> b)``
constraint in the instance context, because otherwise a type error is reported
at the instance definition site.  But this approach means both errors are
reported at the use site::

  ghci> reflexiveEq' id not

  <interactive>:36:1: error:
      • Can't compare functions with (==)
      • In the expression: reflexiveEq' id not
        In an equation for ‘it’: it = reflexiveEq' id not

  <interactive>:36:1: error:
      • Can't compare functions with reflexiveEq
      • In the expression: reflexiveEq' id not
        In an equation for ‘it’: it = reflexiveEq' id not

Ideally, when using a custom type error to report a domain-specific error
message for a particular instance, it would not be necessary to add other
constraints to the instance context.


Marking instances as impossible
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As noted in the previous subsection, a common use of ``TypeError`` is to get a
custom error message when code uses a class instance that a library author
wishes to mark as unusable.

For example, the ``optics`` library
`defines <https://hackage.haskell.org/package/optics-core-0.4/docs/Optics-Internal-Optic-Subtyping.html#t:JoinKinds>`_
the following class and a catch-all instance with a custom error (plus other
overlapping instances that do not use ``TypeError``)::

    class JoinKinds k l m | k l -> m where
      joinKinds :: ...

    instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} ( JoinKinds k l m, TypeError ... ) => JoinKinds k l m where
      joinKinds _ = error "unreachable"

There are two issues with this definition:

#. The instance context mysteriously includes ``JoinKinds k l m``, which is the
   very constraint being defined.  This is necessary to avoid GHC rejecting the
   definition due to a functional dependency violation.  The apparent
   circularity is not a problem in practice, because current GHC versions will
   report the type error without looping, but it is unclear that this behaviour
   is guaranteed to remain consistent in the future.

#. The class method ``joinKinds`` must be given a definition via an explicit
   call to ``error``, to avoid a GHC warning that the method definition is
   missing.

Since the instance will never be used without a type error, it would be better
if the instance context did not require the additional constraint to work around
the functional dependency, and the class method could be omitted.


``TypeError`` and ``-fdefer-type-errors``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A further issue arises with ``-fdefer-type-errors``.  When this flag is enabled,
GHC turns type errors into compile-time warnings, and replaces the erroneous
code with runtime exceptions.  However, when using ``TypeError`` to prevent a
definition from being called, there is nothing to guarantee that the error will
be triggered at runtime.  For example::

  ghci> let v = reflexiveEq 0 (0 :: Double)

  <interactive>:32:9: warning: [-Wdeferred-type-errors]
      • Equality is not reflexive on Double
      • In the expression: reflexiveEq 0 (0 :: Double)
        In an equation for ‘v’: v = reflexiveEq 0 (0 :: Double)
  ghci> v
  False

We would expect evaluation of ``v`` to throw an error, but it does not!  Instead
it uses the "redundant" method definition from the ``ReflexiveEq Double``
instance to yield a value.  See `#16249
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/16249>`_ and `#18310
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/18310>`_ for discussion of this
issue.

Ideally, it would be possible for the definition of the ``reflexiveEq`` method
in the ``ReflexiveEq Double`` instance to explicitly make use of the fact that
the context is inconsistent, rather than giving a bogus definition that is not
expected to be called.  Then under ``-fdefer-type-errors``, evaluation of the
bogus evidence for the constraint would be forced, resulting in the expected
runtime error.


Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

The ``GHC.TypeError`` module (the planned new home for ``TypeError`` per `!6066
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/6066>`_) is extended with
the following definitions::

  class Unsatisfiable (e :: ErrorMessage) where
    unsatisfiableLifted :: a

  unsatisfiable :: forall (e :: ErrorMessage) {rep} (a :: TYPE rep). Unsatisfiable e => a
  unsatisfiable = unsatisfiableLifted @e @((# #) -> a) (# #)

The full type of ``unsatisfiableLifted`` is::

    unsatisfiableLifted :: forall (e :: ErrorMessage) (a :: Type). Unsatisfiable e => a

The class method needs to be lifted, but it is sometimes convenient to have
``unsatisfiable`` be representation-polymorphic (just as ``error`` is). Thus we
use a trick to get from ``unsatisfiableLifted`` to ``unsatisfiable``:
instantiate it with the (lifted) function type ``(# #) -> a`` and apply it to
the unboxed unit tuple.

The ``Unsatisfiable`` class and ``unsatisfiable`` function are exported, but the
``unsatisfiableLifted`` class method is not.


Treatment of ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Special rules in the constraint solver handle ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints
that remain at the end of constraint solving:

#. If at least one Given constraint of the form ``Unsatisfiable e`` is present,
   the constraint solver will automatically solve all Wanted constraints
   (including any ``Unsatisfiable`` Wanted constraints). The evidence for a
   Wanted ``w`` consists of a call to ``unsatisfiable @e @w``.

#. Otherwise, if a Wanted constraint of the form ``Unsatisfiable e`` remains
   unsolved, a type error is reported but the usual "unsolved constraint" error
   message is replaced by the custom message that results from normalising and
   rendering the type ``e :: ErrorMessage``.  The rendering of ``ErrorMessage``
   values works just as for ``TypeError``.

This happens after defaulting; it is rather like defaulting in that it takes
place once "normal" constraint solving has made as much progress as it can.
We wait until the end of constraint solving to make use of Given
``Unsatisfiable`` constraints, rather than exploiting them eagerly, so that
programs are "as defined as possible".  For example, if we have Givens
``(Unsatisfiable e, Eq a)`` and Wanted ``Eq alpha``, it is better to wait in
case we later discover ``a ~ alpha`` and hence give a normal solution to the
``Eq alpha`` Wanted using the ``Eq a`` given.  (This makes a difference to
runtime semantics only when ``-fdefer-type-errors`` is in effect, as discussed
below, or with ``unsafeCoerce``.)

Moreover, ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints have the following special properties:

#. An ``Unsatisfiable`` constraint is never automatically generalised.

#. GHC will report an error if a user attempts to define an instance for
   ``Unsatisfiable``.

#. If an ``Unsatisfiable`` Given constraint is present during pattern-match
   coverage checking, the match is trivially regarded as total.  (This is
   consistent with ``TypeError`` following `#20180
   <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20180>`_; see example 7 below.)

#. If a class instance has an ``Unsatisfiable`` Given constraint in the context,
   it bypasses the functional dependency check.  Moreover, GHC will not emit
   warnings about any missing methods or associated types.  Missing methods will
   be implemented by calling ``unsatisfiable`` (rather than throwing the usual
   "No instance nor default method for class operation" exception).  Missing
   associated types will simply not reduce.  (See section 1.4 for motivation.)

Otherwise ``Unsatisfiable`` behaves like an ordinary class, in particular:

#. During constraint solving, the solver treats ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints
   like any other class with no instances.  An ``Unsatisfiable e`` Given
   constraint can solve a corresponding ``Unsatisfiable e`` Wanted constraint,
   but not ``Unsatisfiable e'`` for some distinct ``e'``.

#. The representation of an ``Unsatisfiable e`` constraint in Core is GHC's
   normal representation of a class with a single method, equivalent to the
   dictionary::

      newtype UnsatisfiableDict e = MkUnsatisfiableDict (forall a . a)

   GHC does not use ``MkUnsatisfiableDict`` when solving constraints, because
   Wanted ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints are only ever solved by producing a call
   to ``unsatisfiable`` (or ``error``, when using ``-fdefer-type-errors``).


Examples
--------

For more substantial examples, see the `unsatisfiable package by Oleg Grenrus
<https://hackage.haskell.org/package/unsatisfiable>`_.  This package implements
a type-checker plugin that roughly corresponds to the design of the
``Unsatisfiable`` constraints in this proposal.

#. The following definitions are accepted (assuming ``DataKinds``,
   ``FlexibleContexts`` and ``TypeApplications`` are enabled)::

     type Msg = Text "Cannot call 'uncallable'."

     uncallable :: Unsatisfiable Msg => ()
     uncallable = unsatisfiable @Msg

     uncallable' :: Unsatisfiable Msg => ()
     uncallable' = uncallable

   The definition of ``uncallable`` is accepted because ``Unsatisfiable`` appears
   as a Given, not a Wanted.  In ``uncallable'``, the Wanted arising from the
   occurrence of ``uncallable`` is solved using the Given in the context.

#. The following definition results in a custom type error message (as the
   ``Unsatisfiable Msg`` constraint is reported rather than being generalised
   over)::

     rejected = uncallable  -- error

#. The following definition is accepted::

     unusual :: Unsatisfiable Msg => Char
     unusual = 42  -- no error

   Here the presence of ``Unsatisfiable Msg`` in the context means that the ``Num
   Char`` constraint arising from the body of ``unusual`` is discharged
   automatically.

#. The following definition is accepted::

     k :: Unsatisfiable (Text "No") => ()
     k = uncallable  -- no error

   The Given ``Unsatisfiable (Text "No")`` solves the Wanted ``Unsatisfiable
   Msg``, even though the messages are different. This shows that error messages
   can be changed.

#. Recall the following example from the Motivation, adapted for
   ``Unsatisfiable``::

     type ExpectTrue x = If x (() :: Constraint) (Unsatisfiable (Text "Input was False!"))

     h :: ExpectTrue x => proxy x -> ()
     h _ = ()

     eg1 _ = h (Proxy @True)   -- no error

     eg2 _ = h (Proxy @False)  -- error

     eg3 p = h p               -- no error

   As with the ``TypeError`` version, ``eg1`` is accepted and ``eg2`` is rejected
   with a custom type error message.  Unlike the ``TypeError`` version, ``eg3`` is
   accepted, with the inferred type::

     eg3 :: If x () (Unsatisfiable ('Text "Input was False!")) => proxy x -> ()

   This is just the result of the normal constraint-solving behaviour.  Since the
   type constructor at the head of the constraint is ``If``, the special-purpose
   treatment of ``Unsatisfiable`` does not come into play.  In contrast, using
   ``TypeError`` results in this definition being rejected, because GHC searches
   deeply inside the type for applications of ``TypeError``.

#. The ``ReflexiveEq`` example from the Motivation can now be written like this::

     class Eq a => ReflexiveEq a where
         reflexiveEq :: a -> a -> Bool
         reflexiveEq = (==)

     instance Unsatisfiable (Text "Can't compare functions with reflexiveEq") => ReflexiveEq (a -> b)

     type DoubleMsg = Text "Equality is not reflexive on Double"
     instance Unsatisfiable DoubleMsg => ReflexiveEq Double where
         reflexiveEq = unsatisfiable @DoubleMsg

   Even though ``Eq`` is a superclass of ``ReflexiveEq``, the instance does not
   need to list it in the context, because the Given ``Unsatisfiable``
   constraint suffices to solve the ``Eq (a -> b)`` constraint.  This means that
   use sites will not accidentally duplicate error messages as with the current
   behaviour of ``TypeError``.

   Moreover, when ``-fdefer-type-errors`` is used to call ``reflexiveEq 0 (0 ::
   Double)``, this will result in a runtime exception that correctly blames the
   use of ``-fdefer-type-errors`` to bypass the ``Unsatisfiable`` constraint.

#. The following is regarded as total by the pattern-match coverage checker
   (thanks to `/u/ComicIronic on Reddit
   <https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/p2ao7v/unsatisfiable_a_ghcproposal_for_better_custom/h8je78s/>`_
   for the example)::

     data MyGADT a where
       MyInt :: MyGADT Int

     type family IsBool a where
       IsBool Bool = ()
       IsBool a    = Unsatisfiable (Text "Must be Bool")

     foo :: IsBool a => MyGADT a -> Void
     foo x = case x of {}

   This means it is possible to use ``Unsatisfiable`` to get custom error
   messages, without needing to write cases that are in practice inaccessible.
   Similar functionality was recently implemented for ``TypeError`` by Sam
   Derbyshire (see `#20180
   <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20180>`_).

#. The following is accepted despite the apparent functional dependency violation::

     class C a b | a -> b
     instance Unsatisfiable (Text "No") => C a b

   That is, an instance can be ruled out with a custom type error even where
   this would otherwise conflict with the functional dependencies.


Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

The points at which ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints trigger type error messages
are well-specified, and fit well with GHC's constraint-based type inference
algorithm.  This means it should be simpler and more predictable than
``TypeError``.

``Unsatisfiable`` does not subsume ``TypeError`` entirely, because
``Unsatisfiable`` is restricted to kind ``Constraint``, whereas ``TypeError`` is
kind-polymorphic.  Thus there may be situations where ``TypeError`` is required,
e.g. the "impossible" cases in type family definitions (comparable to ``error``
at the term level).  Both ``Unsatisfiable`` and ``TypeError`` will remain
available for use, so this proposal does not lead to significant backwards
incompatibility.

The issues raised in the Motivation have now got more principled solutions:

1. The ``NotCharBad`` type family in section 1.1 relied on instantiating
   ``TypeError`` at a kind other than ``Constraint``.  ``Unsatisfiable`` cannot
   be used in this way, and encourages the use of type families that return
   constraints as demonstrated by ``NotCharGood``.

2. The semantics of ``Unsatisfiable`` guarantee that a function like ``foo``
   from section 1.2 should be definable (but not callable)::

      foo :: Unsatisfiable (Text "Don't call foo") => Int
      foo = 0

   With ``TypeError`` this is a merely accidental property of the
   implementation, subject to change (see `#20241
   <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20241>`_).

   Moreover, an example such as ``eg3`` from section 1.2 no longer results in an
   unexpected error::

      eg3 :: If x () (Unsatisfiable (Text "Input was False!")) => proxy x -> ()

   Here the constraint is not headed by ``Unsatisfiable`` so the
   error-reporting mechanism does not fire.  Unlike ``TypeError``, mere
   presence of ``Unsatisfiable`` somewhere within a constraint type does not
   trigger an error.

3. When a Given ``Unsatisfiable`` constraint is present in a context (e.g. of a
   class instance), there is no need to include any other constraints in the
   context.  This avoids the problems with unnecessary additional errors being
   reported as discussed in section 1.3.  For example, the following is
   accepted::

      class Eq a => ReflexiveEq a where ...

      instance Unsatisfiable (Text "Can't compare functions with reflexiveEq") => ReflexiveEq (a -> b)

4. In the ``JoinKinds`` example from section 1.4, the following is accepted::

      instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} ( Unsatisfiable ... ) => JoinKinds k l m

   It is no longer necessary to include ``JoinKinds k l m`` in the context to
   bypass the functional dependency, nor define the ``joinKinds`` class method
   to avoid a redundant warning.

5. The ``unsatisfiable`` function allows explicit appeals to the "evidence" for
   an ``Unsatisfiable`` constraint.  These may be inserted automatically by the
   compiler, but they may also be written explicitly by a user who wishes to
   make clear that a particular term is unreachable.  This avoids the problems
   described in section 1.5, because if ``-fdefer-type-errors`` is used to run
   code that should be unreachable, calls to ``unsatisfiable`` will force the
   error thunk inserted by ``-fdefer-type-errors`` and yield an appropriate
   error message (see further discussion of ``-fdefer-type-errors`` below).


Interaction with deferred type errors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As usual, when ``-fdefer-type-errors`` is enabled, unsolved constraint errors
will be deferred to runtime by the compiler automatically generating a
dictionary that throws a runtime exception if evaluated.  The message attached
to the exception contains the type error that was deferred (including its source
position).

This proposal does not change this behaviour; a use of ``Unsatisfiable`` merely
changes the message that is produced.  For example::

    {-# OPTIONS_GHC -fdefer-type-errors #-}

    f :: Unsatisfiable (Text "Blah blah") => a -> a
    f x = x+1

    main = print (f True)

Compiling this program will emit a warning corresponding to the deferred type
error.  Executing it will throw a runtime exception like this::

    *** Exception: Unsatisfiable.hs:24:15: error:
        • Blah blah
            arising from a use of ‘f’
        • In the first argument of ‘print’, namely ‘(f True)’
          In the expression: print (f True)
          In an equation for ‘main’: main = print (f True)
    (deferred type error)


Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

This is yet another feature, and will require some implementation effort, but it
should not require extensive changes to GHC's existing constraint solving
behaviour.

The differences between ``Unsatisfiable`` and ``TypeError`` may be subtle for
novice users, but the increased convenience of ``Unsatisfiable`` for more
advanced users defining custom type errors in libraries seems worth it.


Alternatives
------------

There have been various requests for more powerful alternatives to
``TypeError``.  This proposal is deliberately simple. `Proposal #59
<https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/59>`_ and `proposal #278
<https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/278>`_ were more ambitious
attempts to improve custom type errors, but both have been abandoned due to
their complexity.

`#18978 <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/18978>`_ suggests
introducing ``Annotate :: ErrorMessage -> Constraint -> Constraint`` where
``Annotate e c`` renders the message ``e`` if the constraint ``c`` cannot be
solved, and is equivalent to ``c`` otherwise.  This is similar to
``WithMessage`` from `proposal #59
<https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/59>`_.  ``Unsatisfiable``
is the special case of ``Annotate`` where the constraint can never be solved.
It might make sense to introduce ``Annotate`` together with or instead of
``Unsatisfiable``, but it is not immediately obvious how to deal with
constraints that are *simplified* rather than solved outright.


Relationship to ``TypeError``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The relationship between ``Unsatisfiable`` and ``TypeError`` was summarised by
David Feuer during the `proposal discussion
<https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/433#issuecomment-945846117>`_:

    ``TypeError`` is a bit like ``throw``—it can be used anywhere.
    ``Unsatisfiable`` is a bit like ``throwIO``—it's fairly well behaved.

Another possible alternative to this proposal would be to refine the strategy
GHC uses for searching for occurrences of ``TypeError``, possibly adding
special-case behaviour when ``TypeError`` is used at kind ``Constraint``.  This
would avoid the need for a separate ``Unsatisfiable`` class.  However, in the
absence of a well-defined operational semantics for type-level evaluation (which
would clearly specify when a ``TypeError`` should be "triggered" during
constraint solving), it seems inevitable that ``TypeError`` will be somewhat ad
hoc.  In contrast, restricting the kind to ``Constraint`` means that it is much
easier to specify when ``Unsatisfiable`` should produce an error message.

Given this, it would perhaps not be unreasonable for GHC to issue a warning when
``TypeError`` is used at kind ``Constraint``, encouraging the user to switch to
``Unsatisfiable`` instead.  However this is not part of the current proposal,
both because it is not immediately obvious how to specify such a warning, and
because it seems better for ``Unsatisfiable`` to be generally accepted by the
community before GHC starts actively warning against ``TypeError``.  (Many
library authors seek to support multiple GHC versions, and so would require a
compatibility shim library to use ``Unsatisfiable`` immediately.)


Other minor alternatives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Having Given ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints automatically solve all Wanted
constraints is not strictly necessary, though it has been requested several
times (`#14983 <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/14983>`_, `#18310
<https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/18310>`_).  The user could instead
be required to call ``unsatisfiable`` explicitly to produce a value of type
``Dict c``, defined by ``data Dict c where Dict :: c => Dict c``.

Similarly, the pattern match coverage checker, functional dependency check, and
missing methods warning could remain ignorant of ``Unsatisfiable`` constraints.
Instead the user could explicitly write calls to ``unsatisfiable``.

The proposed definition of ``unsatisfiable`` is levity-polymorphic, so it can be
used directly at unlifted types.  This is consistent with ``error``, but is not
strictly necessary.  A consequence is that ``import GHC.TypeError (Unsatisfiable
(..))`` will not import ``unsatisfiable``, so users preferring explicit imports
will need to write ``import GHC.TypeError (Unsatisfiable, unsatisfiable)``
instead.  While mildly annoying, this preserves freedom to tweak the class
definition in the future without breaking backwards compatibility, and is
consistent with ``Coercible`` and ``coerce``, which likewise have to be imported
separately.


Unresolved Questions
--------------------

None.
